aiDocs/prd.md, before:

# Product Requirements Document — Micro-Deck
**Version:** 1.0
**Status:** Draft
**Last Updated:** February 2026
**Platform:** Flutter (iOS + Android)
**Scope:** v1 MVP

---

## 1. Product Overview

### 1.1 What Micro-Deck Is

Micro-Deck is a minimalist mobile **initiation tool** — not a habit tracker, not a planner, not a focus timer. It helps users bridge the intention-behavior gap by removing the friction of *starting* a habit, not by measuring, scheduling, or gamifying behavior after the fact.

The core loop:
1. User builds a personal deck of cards, each representing one tiny action tied to a self-defined goal
2. User optionally schedules cards for specific days/times
3. A contextual notification surfaces the card at the right moment
4. User taps the card → full-screen minimal timer begins
5. A haptic pulse signals completion — no animations, no streak counter, no reward screen

### 1.2 The Problem Being Solved

Most people who struggle with habits don't fail because they lack motivation or information. They fail at the **moment of initiation** — the gap between intending to do something and physically starting it. This gap is especially pronounced for people with ADHD, executive dysfunction, or digital burnout.

Existing tools address adjacent problems:
- **Habit trackers** measure behavior after the fact, creating guilt when history shows inconsistency
- **App blockers** restrict access but offer no replacement behavior
- **Focus timers** require already being in motion — they don't help you start
- **Routine planners** add cognitive overhead that defeats the purpose for executive dysfunction users

No widely-used app owns the "initiation" moment. Micro-Deck does.

### 1.3 Product Positioning

> *"We don't police you. We give you a better next move."*

Micro-Deck is the only habit tool built explicitly to help users **start** — not track, not plan, not restrict. Everything that doesn't serve initiation is excluded by design.

**What the app deliberately excludes:**
- Streaks or completion history
- Progress charts or stats
- Social features or sharing
- Gamification (points, badges, rewards)
- Cloud sync or user accounts
- Prescribed habits or coaching content

---

## 2. Target Users

### 2.1 Primary Audience

**People with ADHD or executive dysfunction**
- Struggle with task initiation despite knowing what they want to do
- Often harmed by streak-based guilt mechanics in existing apps
- Need external triggers (notifications) but are burned by notification overload
- 15.5M diagnosed U.S. adults (CDC); hundreds of millions globally including undiagnosed

**People experiencing digital burnout**
- Recognize their phone as a distraction trap
- Actively looking for alternatives to doomscrolling
- Skeptical of apps that use the same engagement mechanics as social media
- Growing segment driven by attention-economy backlash

### 2.2 Secondary Audience

**Productivity minimalists**
- Have tried complex systems (Notion, full routine apps, gamified trackers)
- Found the maintenance overhead defeats the purpose
- Want a tool that does one thing and does it well

### 2.3 Who This Is Not For

- Users who want to track history or measure consistency
- Users who are motivated by streaks and competitive mechanics
- Users seeking a comprehensive daily planner or routine manager
- Android-only users in v1 (iOS first; Android follows same codebase)

### 2.4 User Personas

**Persona 1 — "The Avoider"**
Diagnosed with ADHD. Has downloaded and abandoned 6 habit apps. Knows exactly what they want to do but can't start. Hates seeing red broken streaks. Needs the smallest possible on-ramp.

**Persona 2 — "The Burned Out Professional"**
No clinical diagnosis. Works in a demanding job. Phone is both their tool and their enemy. Has tried blockers (too restrictive) and timers (starts before they can use them). Wants to feel in control of one small thing.

**Persona 3 — "The Returning Beginner"**
Has tried to build habits many times. Motivated in bursts. Needs something forgiving enough to come back to after a week away without feeling ashamed.

---

## 3. Behavioral Science Foundation

The design of Micro-Deck is grounded in established behavior change research. This is embedded in the experience — not marketed as a feature claim.

| Principle | Research Basis | How Micro-Deck Applies It |
|---|---|---|
| **Implementation Intentions** | Gollwitzer (1999) — "if-then" planning significantly improves follow-through | Card scheduling ("When it's 7am Monday, I will put on running shoes") |
| **Minimum Viable Behavior** | BJ Fogg's Tiny Habits — anchor to the smallest possible version of a habit | 2-minute default timer; short enough the brain can't argue |
| **Autonomy Support** | Self-Determination Theory — user-authored goals reduce psychological reactance | User creates all cards; app never assigns tasks |
| **Contextual Cueing** | Habit loop research (Clear, Wood) — environmental cues drive initiation | Scheduled notifications tied to specific cards and times |
| **Completion Signaling** | Operant conditioning — clear, immediate feedback reinforces behavior | Haptic pulse on timer completion |

---

## 4. Core Features — v1 MVP

### 4.1 Onboarding (The First Card)

The onboarding experience IS the first use of the product. The goal: get the user to a completion haptic before they see a settings screen, pricing prompt, or feature explanation.

**Flow:**
```
Screen 1 — Single question, full screen, minimal
"What's one thing you've been meaning to start
but keep putting off?"
[text field — verb-first placeholder: "e.g. Put on my running shoes"]

Screen 2 — One confirmation
"Good. Let's do two minutes of it right now."
[Start]   [Save for later]

Screen 3 — Timer
Full screen, dark background, pulsing dot, countdown
No UI chrome. No back button during session.

Completion — Haptic + one line
"That's it. You started."
[soft explainer: what just happened and why it works — skippable]
```

**Onboarding rules:**
- No account creation
- No notification permission prompt during onboarding (ask after first win)
- No feature tour or walkthrough
- If user taps "Save for later," card is created and they land on the deck view

### 4.2 The Deck

The primary view of the app. A vertical stack of user-created cards.

**Card anatomy:**
- Action label (verb-first, e.g., "Put on running shoes")
- Optional goal context shown faintly below (e.g., "Run 3x/week") — private, never tracked
- Duration badge (default: 2 min, adjustable 1–10 min per card)
- Optional schedule indicator (e.g., "Mon · Wed · Fri")

**Deck interactions:**
- **Tap card** → opens timer screen for that card
- **Swipe left** → defer (moves card to bottom of deck for today)
- **Long press** → edit or archive options
- **Pull down** → reveal "Just One" mode (shows only top card, hides rest)

**Deck rules:**
- Free tier: 1 goal, up to 5 cards
- Pro tier: unlimited goals and cards
- Cards are ordered by: scheduled time (if set) → manual order
- No reorder animation complexity — simple drag to reorder

### 4.3 Card Creation

**Creation flow:**
```
1. "What's the action?" (required)
   Placeholder: "Start with a verb — 'Open', 'Put on', 'Write one sentence'"

2. "What goal is this for?" (optional)
   Placeholder: "e.g. Run 3x/week" — private, never shown to others

3. "How long?" (optional, defaults to 2 min)
   Slider: 1 – 10 minutes

4. "When do you want to try this?" (optional — Pro feature)
   Day picker + time picker
   Repeating or one-time
```

**Starter templates (Free + Pro):**
A small browsable library (~20 cards) users can pull from and personalize. Organized by rough life area (movement, focus, connection, rest). Templates reduce blank-page friction without being prescriptive.

Examples:
- "Put on walking shoes" → Move more
- "Open my notebook" → Write regularly
- "Fill my water bottle" → Drink more water
- "Text one person" → Stay connected

### 4.4 The Timer (Silent Pulse)

The core ritual experience.

**Timer screen:**
- Full-screen dark background
- Large, clean countdown (MM:SS)
- Subtle pulsing ambient dot — calm, not urgent
- No other UI elements during session
- Screen stays on (idle timer disabled for duration)
- No back gesture during active session (prevents accidental exits)
- Pause is allowed — tap anywhere to pause, tap again to resume

**Completion:**
- Haptic pulse fires at zero (medium impact, single beat — not a buzz)
- Countdown replaced by a single word or short phrase (e.g., "Done." or "Started.")
- 2-second pause, then soft return-to-deck animation
- No streak update, no confetti, no score — intentional

**Abandoned session:**
- If user exits early (via back button after pause), card returns to deck without judgment
- No "you quit" language anywhere

### 4.5 Card Scheduling & Notifications (Pro)

**Scheduling:**
- Per-card, optional: specific days of the week + time
- One-time or recurring
- Multiple schedules per card not supported in v1

**Notification behavior:**
- Notification copy: card action label + duration (e.g., "Put on running shoes · 2 min")
- Tapping notification opens app directly to that card's timer screen
- One notification per scheduled card instance — no follow-up nags
- Notification permission is requested after first card completion, not during onboarding

**iOS 64-notification limit — queue architecture:**
- All schedules stored locally in the database
- On each app open: flush expired scheduled notifications, compute next N upcoming, register only those
- Graceful degradation: if user has denied notifications, deck still functions fully — scheduling is visible on cards but doesn't fire

### 4.6 Card Archiving (the "Dormant Deck")

**Archiving trigger — user-initiated only:**
After a card has been deferred (swiped left) 3 or more times in a week, a gentle, non-urgent prompt appears:

> *"You've set this one aside a few times. Want to rest it for now?"*

Options: **Rest it** (archives to Dormant Deck) | **Keep it** (no judgment, dismisses prompt permanently for 7 days)

**Dormant Deck:**
- Accessible via a quiet "Resting" section at the bottom of settings or deck view
- Cards are fully retrievable at any time
- No timestamps of when they were archived — no shame data
- Language throughout: "resting," "paused," "dormant" — never "failed," "missed," "abandoned"

### 4.7 "Just One" Mode

For users in a low-function state who can't engage with a full deck.

**Activation:** pull down on deck view or tap a "Just One" button in the corner

**Experience:**
- Shows only the top card, centered on screen
- All other cards hidden
- Two options: [Start] or [Not today]
- "Not today" moves the card to tomorrow with no prompt, no guilt copy
- Mode persists until user dismisses it

### 4.8 Monetization — Freemium + One-Time Pro Unlock

**Free tier (forever, no expiration):**
- 1 goal with up to 5 cards
- Full timer experience
- Full haptic completion
- Starter templates
- "Just One" mode
- Manual deck use (no scheduling)

**Pro tier (one-time purchase, $4.99–$6.99):**
- Unlimited goals and cards
- Card scheduling + notifications
- Dormant Deck (archive/restore)
- Additional template library
- (Future) Apple Watch companion

**Paywall placement:**
- Shown after first successful card completion — motivation is highest here
- Never shown during onboarding
- Never shown as a gate to the core timer experience
- Copy: *"Unlock the full deck. No subscription. No account. Yours forever."*

---

## 5. Technical Requirements

### 5.1 Platform & Stack

| Layer | Technology |
|---|---|
| Framework | Flutter (Dart) |
| Target platforms | iOS (primary), Android (same codebase) |
| Minimum iOS version | iOS 16+ |
| Minimum Android version | Android 8.0 (API 26)+ |
| Local storage | `drift` (SQLite wrapper, type-safe) |
| Notifications | `flutter_local_notifications` |
| Haptics | `haptic_feedback` package |
| State management | Riverpod |
| Build pipeline (iOS) | Codemagic CI/CD |

### 5.2 Data Architecture

All data is stored locally on-device. No backend. No user account. No telemetry.

**Core data models:**

```
Goal
  id: UUID
  label: String
  createdAt: DateTime

Card
  id: UUID
  goalId: UUID (nullable — card can exist without a goal)
  actionLabel: String
  durationSeconds: Int (default: 120)
  sortOrder: Int
  isArchived: Bool
  createdAt: DateTime

Schedule (Pro)
  id: UUID
  cardId: UUID
  weekdays: [Int] (0=Sun ... 6=Sat)
  timeOfDay: TimeOfDay
  isRecurring: Bool
  isActive: Bool

Session
  id: UUID
  cardId: UUID
  startedAt: DateTime
  completedAt: DateTime (nullable — null = abandoned)
  durationSeconds: Int
```

**Note on sessions:** session data is stored for local notification rescheduling logic and for the archiving prompt trigger (counting recent deferrals). It is never surfaced to the user as history or performance data.

### 5.3 Notification Queue Architecture

To work within the iOS 64-notification limit:

1. All schedules stored in `Schedule` table
2. On every app open (and `AppLifecycleState.resumed`): cancel all pending notifications, compute next 40 upcoming instances across all active schedules, register those
3. On schedule create/edit/delete: trigger immediate recompute
4. If notifications denied: schedules remain stored, cards show schedule indicator, no notifications fire — app remains fully functional

### 5.4 Offline & Privacy Requirements

- Zero network requests in v1
- No analytics SDK
- No crash reporting SDK that phones home (use Flutter's built-in error handling with local logging only)
- No third-party SDKs beyond package dependencies
- App Store privacy label: no data collected

### 5.5 Performance Requirements

- App cold launch to deck visible: < 1.5 seconds
- Card tap to timer screen: < 200ms (no loading state)
- Timer accuracy: ± 1 second over a 10-minute session
- Haptic fires within 100ms of timer reaching zero

---

## 6. Design Principles

These are not aesthetic guidelines — they are decision filters. When a design or feature choice is uncertain, run it through these.

1. **Does this help the user start something?** If no, it doesn't belong in the app.
2. **Does this add cognitive load?** If yes, simplify or cut it.
3. **Could this make a user feel shame?** If yes, rewrite the copy or remove the mechanic.
4. **Does this require a network connection?** If yes, find a local-only solution or cut it.
5. **Does this make the timer experience more reliable?** Prioritize this above feature additions.

**Visual language:**
- Dark, calm palette — not sterile, not playful
- Large, readable typography — accessibility is a baseline, not a feature
- Minimal chrome: no tab bars during active sessions, no persistent navigation during timer
- Motion: purposeful and slow — no snappy animations, no bounces, no celebration effects

---

## 7. Success Metrics

These metrics exist for internal product validation, not user-facing tracking.

| Metric | Target | Why It Matters |
|---|---|---|
| **Activation rate** | ≥ 60% of installs complete 1 card in session 1 | Core validation gate — product wins or loses here |
| **Day 7 retention** | ≥ 25% of activated users return on day 7 | Validates retention without streaks |
| **Notification opt-in rate** | ≥ 40% (asked post-first-win) | Timing of ask matters — this validates placement |
| **Pro conversion rate** | ≥ 8% of activated users | Validates freemium model and paywall placement |
| **Session abandon rate** | ≤ 20% of started timers | High abandon = timer UX or duration issue |
| **Archiving prompt acceptance** | ≥ 30% choose "Rest it" | Validates compassionate archiving language |

---

## 8. Competitive Landscape Summary

*Informed by market research — see `ai/guides/habit-help-market-research.md`*

| Competitor | Category | Why Users Leave | Micro-Deck's Contrast |
|---|---|---|---|
| Opal ($19.99/mo) | App blocker | Unreliable blocking, cluttered UI | Replaces the moment vs. policing it |
| Freedom ($99.50 lifetime) | App blocker | Bypass workarounds, support friction | Alternative behavior vs. restriction |
| one sec ($2.99/mo) | Friction tool | Setup friction, annoying by design | Increases good starts vs. reducing bad opens |
| Forest (paid) | Focus timer | Gamification fatigue, feature bloat | 2-min initiation vs. 25-min sessions |
| Tiimo / Routinery | Routine planner | "Too much system upkeep" | Initiation-only vs. full day management |
| Streaks / Habitify | Habit tracker | Streak guilt, shame on bad days | No history vs. performance measurement |

**The white space Micro-Deck owns:**
No major app currently positions itself as an *initiation ritual* — calm, autonomous, guilt-free, and built specifically for the stuck moment. This is the position to hold and defend.

---

## 9. Out of Scope for v1

The following are explicitly excluded from v1 to maintain product focus:

| Feature | Rationale |
|---|---|
| Apple Watch companion | Requires Swift/Xcode; deferred to v2 |
| Android-specific optimizations | Same codebase ships; no platform-specific work |
| Cloud sync / iCloud backup | Undermines no-account value prop; deferred |
| Social sharing | Contradicts privacy-first philosophy |
| LLM / AI suggestions | Insufficient local data in v1 to personalize meaningfully |
| Habit history / analytics views | Core philosophy: no history shown to user |
| Multiple notification times per card | Adds scheduling complexity; one time per card in v1 |
| Widget support | Deferred to v2 |
| Siri / Shortcuts integration | Deferred to v2 |

---

## 10. Open Questions

These require user research or early testing to resolve before implementation:

1. **Deferral threshold for archiving prompt:** Is 3 deferrals in a week the right trigger? Could be too aggressive for infrequent users.
2. **Default timer duration:** Is 2 minutes the right default for onboarding, or should the first card use a 1-minute default to lower the bar further?
3. **Notification copy:** Does using the card's action label verbatim in the notification feel personal or robotic? Needs copy testing.
4. **"Just One" mode discoverability:** Pull-down is low-discoverability — consider whether this needs a more visible entry point.
5. **Free tier card limit:** 5 cards per 1 goal — is this enough for users to feel the value of the product, or does it feel too constrained for real use?
6. **Pro paywall timing:** Show after first completion vs. after first session with 3+ cards completed — which moment produces higher conversion?

Commit message:

Updated architecture, context, prd, and market research files

aiDocs/prd.md, after:

# Product Requirements Document — Micro-Deck
**Version:** 1.0
**Status:** Draft
**Last Updated:** February 2026
**Platform:** Flutter (iOS + Android)
**Scope:** v1 MVP

---

## 1. Product Overview

### 1.1 What Micro-Deck Is

Micro-Deck is a minimalist mobile **initiation tool** — not a habit tracker, not a planner, not a focus timer. It helps users bridge the intention-behavior gap by removing the friction of *starting* a habit, not by measuring, scheduling, or gamifying behavior after the fact.

The core loop:
1. User builds a personal deck of cards, each representing one tiny action tied to a self-defined goal
2. User optionally schedules cards for specific days/times
3. A contextual notification surfaces the card at the right moment
4. User taps the card → full-screen minimal timer begins
5. A haptic pulse signals completion — no animations, no streak counter, no reward screen

### 1.2 The Problem Being Solved

Most people who struggle with habits don't fail because they lack motivation or information. They fail at the **moment of initiation** — the gap between intending to do something and physically starting it. This gap is especially pronounced for people with ADHD, executive dysfunction, or digital burnout.

Existing tools address adjacent problems:
- **Habit trackers** measure behavior after the fact, creating guilt when history shows inconsistency
- **App blockers** restrict access but offer no replacement behavior
- **Focus timers** require already being in motion — they don't help you start
- **Routine planners** add cognitive overhead that defeats the purpose for executive dysfunction users

No widely-used app owns the "initiation" moment. Micro-Deck does.

### 1.3 Product Positioning

> *"We don't police you. We give you a better next move."*

Micro-Deck is the only habit tool built explicitly to help users **start** — not track, not plan, not restrict. Everything that doesn't serve initiation is excluded by design.

**What the app deliberately excludes:**
- Streaks or completion history
- Progress charts or stats
- Social features or sharing
- Gamification (points, badges, rewards)
- Cloud sync or user accounts
- Prescribed habits or coaching content

---

## 2. Target Users

### 2.1 Primary Audience

**People with ADHD or executive dysfunction**
- Struggle with task initiation despite knowing what they want to do
- Often harmed by streak-based guilt mechanics in existing apps
- Need external triggers (notifications) but are burned by notification overload
- 15.5M diagnosed U.S. adults (CDC); hundreds of millions globally including undiagnosed

**People experiencing digital burnout**
- Recognize their phone as a distraction trap
- Actively looking for alternatives to doomscrolling
- Skeptical of apps that use the same engagement mechanics as social media
- Growing segment driven by attention-economy backlash

### 2.2 Secondary Audience

**Productivity minimalists**
- Have tried complex systems (Notion, full routine apps, gamified trackers)
- Found the maintenance overhead defeats the purpose
- Want a tool that does one thing and does it well

### 2.3 Who This Is Not For

- Users who want to track history or measure consistency
- Users who are motivated by streaks and competitive mechanics
- Users seeking a comprehensive daily planner or routine manager
- Android-only users in v1 (iOS first; Android follows same codebase)

### 2.4 User Personas

**Persona 1 — "The Avoider"**
Diagnosed with ADHD. Has downloaded and abandoned 6 habit apps. Knows exactly what they want to do but can't start. Hates seeing red broken streaks. Needs the smallest possible on-ramp.

**Persona 2 — "The Burned Out Professional"**
No clinical diagnosis. Works in a demanding job. Phone is both their tool and their enemy. Has tried blockers (too restrictive) and timers (starts before they can use them). Wants to feel in control of one small thing.

**Persona 3 — "The Returning Beginner"**
Has tried to build habits many times. Motivated in bursts. Needs something forgiving enough to come back to after a week away without feeling ashamed.

---

## 3. Behavioral Science Foundation

The design of Micro-Deck is grounded in established behavior change research. This is embedded in the experience — not marketed as a feature claim.

| Principle | Research Basis | How Micro-Deck Applies It |
|---|---|---|
| **Implementation Intentions** | Gollwitzer (1999) — "if-then" planning significantly improves follow-through | Card scheduling ("When it's 7am Monday, I will put on running shoes") |
| **Minimum Viable Behavior** | BJ Fogg's Tiny Habits — anchor to the smallest possible version of a habit | 2-minute default timer; short enough the brain can't argue |
| **Autonomy Support** | Self-Determination Theory — user-authored goals reduce psychological reactance | User creates all cards; app never assigns tasks |
| **Contextual Cueing** | Habit loop research (Clear, Wood) — environmental cues drive initiation | Scheduled notifications tied to specific cards and times |
| **Completion Signaling** | Operant conditioning — clear, immediate feedback reinforces behavior | Haptic pulse on timer completion |

---

## 4. Core Features — v1 MVP

### 4.1 Onboarding (The First Card)

The onboarding experience IS the first use of the product. The goal: get the user to a completion haptic before they see a settings screen, pricing prompt, or feature explanation.

**Flow:**
```
Screen 0 — Welcome (first launch only)
App name + tagline: "Start the thing you keep putting off."
Sub-line: "One card. Two minutes. That's it."
[Let's begin →]

Screen 1A — Goal
"What do you want to work toward?"
[text field — open placeholder: "e.g. Run more often · Sleep better · Write regularly"]
[Next →]

Screen 1B — Action (goal shown faintly above as context)
"What's one tiny thing that starts it?"
[text field — verb-first placeholder: "e.g. Put on my running shoes"]
[Let's go →]

Screen 2 — Confirmation
"Good. Let's do two minutes of it right now."
User's typed action label shown back to them
[Start now]   [Save for later]

Screen 3 — Timer
Full screen, dark background, pulsing dot, countdown
No UI chrome. No back button during active session.

Completion — Haptic + one line
"That's it. You started."
[soft explainer: what just happened and why it works — skippable, post-MVP]
```

**Why two onboarding questions (not one):**
Separating goal from action mirrors implementation intention research (Gollwitzer 1999) — the goal→action link is made explicit and visible. The user sees their goal faintly above the action field on Screen 1B, reinforcing that the tiny action *serves* something they care about. This is more effective than a single "what do you want to do?" prompt.

**Onboarding rules:**
- No account creation
- No notification permission prompt during onboarding (ask after first win)
- No feature tour or walkthrough
- If user taps "Save for later," card is created and they land on the deck view

### 4.2 The Deck

The primary view of the app. A vertical stack of user-created cards.

**Card anatomy:**
- Action label (verb-first, e.g., "Put on running shoes")
- Optional goal context shown faintly below (e.g., "Run 3x/week") — private, never tracked
- Duration badge (default: 2 min, adjustable 1–10 min per card)
- Optional schedule indicator (e.g., "Mon · Wed · Fri")

**Deck interactions:**
- **Tap card** → opens timer screen for that card
- **Swipe left** → defer (moves card to bottom of deck for today)
- **Long press** → edit or archive options
- **Pull down** → reveal "Just One" mode (shows only top card, hides rest)

**Deck rules:**
- Free tier: 1 goal, up to 5 cards
- Pro tier: unlimited goals and cards
- Cards are ordered by: scheduled time (if set) → manual order
- No reorder animation complexity — simple drag to reorder

### 4.3 Card Creation

**Creation flow:**
```
1. "What's the action?" (required)
   Placeholder: "Start with a verb — 'Open', 'Put on', 'Write one sentence'"

2. "What goal is this for?" (optional)
   Placeholder: "e.g. Run 3x/week" — private, never shown to others

3. "How long?" (optional, defaults to 2 min)
   Slider: 1 – 10 minutes

4. "When do you want to try this?" (optional — Pro feature)
   Day picker + time picker
   Repeating or one-time
```

**Starter templates (Free + Pro):**
A small browsable library (~20 cards) users can pull from and personalize. Organized by rough life area (movement, focus, connection, rest). Templates reduce blank-page friction without being prescriptive.

Examples:
- "Put on walking shoes" → Move more
- "Open my notebook" → Write regularly
- "Fill my water bottle" → Drink more water
- "Text one person" → Stay connected

### 4.4 The Timer (Silent Pulse)

The core ritual experience.

**Timer screen:**
- Full-screen dark background
- Large, clean countdown (MM:SS)
- Subtle pulsing ambient dot — calm, not urgent
- No other UI elements during session
- Screen stays on (idle timer disabled for duration)
- No back gesture during active session (prevents accidental exits)
- Pause is allowed — tap anywhere to pause, tap again to resume

**Completion:**
- Haptic pulse fires at zero (medium impact, single beat — not a buzz)
- Countdown replaced by a single word or short phrase (e.g., "Done." or "Started.")
- 2-second pause, then soft return-to-deck animation
- No streak update, no confetti, no score — intentional

**Abandoned session:**
- If user exits early (via back button after pause), card returns to deck without judgment
- No "you quit" language anywhere

### 4.5 Card Scheduling & Notifications (Pro)

**Scheduling:**
- Per-card, optional: specific days of the week + time
- One-time or recurring
- Multiple schedules per card not supported in v1

**Notification behavior:**
- Notification copy: card action label + duration (e.g., "Put on running shoes · 2 min")
- Tapping notification opens app directly to that card's timer screen
- One notification per scheduled card instance — no follow-up nags
- Notification permission is requested after first card completion, not during onboarding

**iOS 64-notification limit — queue architecture:**
- All schedules stored locally in the database
- On each app open: flush expired scheduled notifications, compute next N upcoming, register only those
- Graceful degradation: if user has denied notifications, deck still functions fully — scheduling is visible on cards but doesn't fire

### 4.6 Card Archiving (the "Dormant Deck")

**Archiving trigger — user-initiated only:**
After a card has been deferred (swiped left) 3 or more times in a week, a gentle, non-urgent prompt appears:

> *"You've set this one aside a few times. Want to rest it for now?"*

Options: **Rest it** (archives to Dormant Deck) | **Keep it** (no judgment, dismisses prompt permanently for 7 days)

**Dormant Deck:**
- Accessible via a quiet "Resting" section at the bottom of settings or deck view
- Cards are fully retrievable at any time
- No timestamps of when they were archived — no shame data
- Language throughout: "resting," "paused," "dormant" — never "failed," "missed," "abandoned"

### 4.7 "Just One" Mode

For users in a low-function state who can't engage with a full deck.

**Activation:** pull down on deck view or tap a "Just One" button in the corner

**Experience:**
- Shows only the top card, centered on screen
- All other cards hidden
- Two options: [Start] or [Not today]
- "Not today" moves the card to tomorrow with no prompt, no guilt copy
- Mode persists until user dismisses it

### 4.8 Monetization — Freemium + One-Time Pro Unlock

**Free tier (forever, no expiration):**
- 1 goal with up to 5 cards
- Full timer experience
- Full haptic completion
- Starter templates
- "Just One" mode
- Manual deck use (no scheduling)

**Pro tier (one-time purchase, $4.99–$6.99):**
- Unlimited goals and cards
- Card scheduling + notifications
- Dormant Deck (archive/restore)
- Additional template library
- (Future) Apple Watch companion

**Paywall placement:**
- Shown after first successful card completion — motivation is highest here
- Never shown during onboarding
- Never shown as a gate to the core timer experience
- Copy: *"Unlock the full deck. No subscription. No account. Yours forever."*

---

## 5. Technical Requirements

### 5.1 Platform & Stack

| Layer | Technology |
|---|---|
| Framework | Flutter (Dart) |
| Target platforms | iOS (primary), Android (same codebase) |
| Minimum iOS version | iOS 16+ |
| Minimum Android version | Android 8.0 (API 26)+ |
| Local storage | `drift` (SQLite wrapper, type-safe) |
| Notifications | `flutter_local_notifications` |
| Haptics | `haptic_feedback` package |
| State management | Riverpod |
| Build pipeline (iOS) | Codemagic CI/CD |

### 5.2 Data Architecture

All data is stored locally on-device. No backend. No user account. No telemetry.

**Core data models:**

```
Goal
  id: UUID
  label: String
  createdAt: DateTime

Card
  id: UUID
  goalId: UUID (nullable — card can exist without a goal)
  actionLabel: String
  durationSeconds: Int (default: 120)
  sortOrder: Int
  isArchived: Bool
  createdAt: DateTime

Schedule (Pro)
  id: UUID
  cardId: UUID
  weekdays: [Int] (0=Sun ... 6=Sat)
  timeOfDay: TimeOfDay
  isRecurring: Bool
  isActive: Bool

Session
  id: UUID
  cardId: UUID
  startedAt: DateTime
  completedAt: DateTime (nullable — null = abandoned)
  durationSeconds: Int
```

**Note on sessions:** session data is stored for local notification rescheduling logic and for the archiving prompt trigger (counting recent deferrals). It is never surfaced to the user as history or performance data.

### 5.3 Notification Queue Architecture

To work within the iOS 64-notification limit:

1. All schedules stored in `Schedule` table
2. On every app open (and `AppLifecycleState.resumed`): cancel all pending notifications, compute next 40 upcoming instances across all active schedules, register those
3. On schedule create/edit/delete: trigger immediate recompute
4. If notifications denied: schedules remain stored, cards show schedule indicator, no notifications fire — app remains fully functional

### 5.4 Offline & Privacy Requirements

- Zero network requests in v1
- No analytics SDK
- No crash reporting SDK that phones home (use Flutter's built-in error handling with local logging only)
- No third-party SDKs beyond package dependencies
- App Store privacy label: no data collected

### 5.5 Performance Requirements

- App cold launch to deck visible: < 1.5 seconds
- Card tap to timer screen: < 200ms (no loading state)
- Timer accuracy: ± 1 second over a 10-minute session
- Haptic fires within 100ms of timer reaching zero

---

## 6. Design Principles

These are not aesthetic guidelines — they are decision filters. When a design or feature choice is uncertain, run it through these.

1. **Does this help the user start something?** If no, it doesn't belong in the app.
2. **Does this add cognitive load?** If yes, simplify or cut it.
3. **Could this make a user feel shame?** If yes, rewrite the copy or remove the mechanic.
4. **Does this require a network connection?** If yes, find a local-only solution or cut it.
5. **Does this make the timer experience more reliable?** Prioritize this above feature additions.

**Visual language:**
- Dark, calm palette — not sterile, not playful
- Large, readable typography — accessibility is a baseline, not a feature
- Minimal chrome: no tab bars during active sessions, no persistent navigation during timer
- Motion: purposeful and slow — no snappy animations, no bounces, no celebration effects

---

## 7. Success Metrics

These metrics exist for internal product validation, not user-facing tracking.

| Metric | Target | Why It Matters |
|---|---|---|
| **Activation rate** | ≥ 60% of installs complete 1 card in session 1 | Core validation gate — product wins or loses here |
| **Day 7 retention** | ≥ 25% of activated users return on day 7 | Validates retention without streaks |
| **Notification opt-in rate** | ≥ 40% (asked post-first-win) | Timing of ask matters — this validates placement |
| **Pro conversion rate** | ≥ 8% of activated users | Validates freemium model and paywall placement |
| **Session abandon rate** | ≤ 20% of started timers | High abandon = timer UX or duration issue |
| **Archiving prompt acceptance** | ≥ 30% choose "Rest it" | Validates compassionate archiving language |

---

## 8. Competitive Landscape Summary

*Informed by market research — see `ai/guides/habit-help-market-research.md`*

| Competitor | Category | Why Users Leave | Micro-Deck's Contrast |
|---|---|---|---|
| Opal ($19.99/mo) | App blocker | Unreliable blocking, cluttered UI | Replaces the moment vs. policing it |
| Freedom ($99.50 lifetime) | App blocker | Bypass workarounds, support friction | Alternative behavior vs. restriction |
| one sec ($2.99/mo) | Friction tool | Setup friction, annoying by design | Increases good starts vs. reducing bad opens |
| Forest (paid) | Focus timer | Gamification fatigue, feature bloat | 2-min initiation vs. 25-min sessions |
| Tiimo / Routinery | Routine planner | "Too much system upkeep" | Initiation-only vs. full day management |
| Streaks / Habitify | Habit tracker | Streak guilt, shame on bad days | No history vs. performance measurement |

**The white space Micro-Deck owns:**
No major app currently positions itself as an *initiation ritual* — calm, autonomous, guilt-free, and built specifically for the stuck moment. This is the position to hold and defend.

---

## 9. Out of Scope for v1

The following are explicitly excluded from v1 to maintain product focus:

| Feature | Rationale |
|---|---|
| Apple Watch companion | Requires Swift/Xcode; deferred to v2 |
| Android-specific optimizations | Same codebase ships; no platform-specific work |
| Cloud sync / iCloud backup | Undermines no-account value prop; deferred |
| Social sharing | Contradicts privacy-first philosophy |
| LLM / AI suggestions | Insufficient local data in v1 to personalize meaningfully |
| Habit history / analytics views | Core philosophy: no history shown to user |
| Multiple notification times per card | Adds scheduling complexity; one time per card in v1 |
| Widget support | Deferred to v2 |
| Siri / Shortcuts integration | Deferred to v2 |

---

## 10. Open Questions

These require user research or early testing to resolve before implementation:

1. **Deferral threshold for archiving prompt:** Is 3 deferrals in a week the right trigger? Could be too aggressive for infrequent users.
2. **Default timer duration:** Is 2 minutes the right default for onboarding, or should the first card use a 1-minute default to lower the bar further?
3. **Notification copy:** Does using the card's action label verbatim in the notification feel personal or robotic? Needs copy testing.
4. **"Just One" mode discoverability:** Pull-down is low-discoverability — consider whether this needs a more visible entry point.
5. **Free tier card limit:** 5 cards per 1 goal — is this enough for users to feel the value of the product, or does it feel too constrained for real use?
6. **Pro paywall timing:** Show after first completion vs. after first session with 3+ cards completed — which moment produces higher conversion?
